---
layout: blog-post
title:  "a lifelong obsession with gingerbread and its eradication"
date:   2015-02-23 18:50:21
image: /images/gingerbread.jpg
categories: [blog] 
excerpt: "Some childhood memories of mine have only taken significance years, or even decades, later when I make some connection between what happened then and the way I feel about things now. One of these early memories, that has informed a lot of my beliefs about design, happened at a Sears appliance warehouse when I was about 10 years old. It was the time I discovered the word “gingerbread” has two meanings, and it was, trust me, a big moment in my life..."
---

{% include image.html img="/images/gingerbread.jpg" title="Newport Mansion" %}

Some childhood memories of mine have only taken significance years, or even decades, later when I make some connection between what happened then and the way I feel about things now. One of these early memories, that has informed a lot of my beliefs about design, happened at a Sears appliance warehouse when I was about 10 years old. It was the time I discovered the word “gingerbread” has two meanings, and it was, trust me, a big moment in my life.

As a 10 year old let loose in a giant room full of rows of refrigerators, hundreds of them, I felt like one of the kids in Willy Wonka’s factory. I lost my mind. I opened every fridge at least once, peeked inside, and couldn’t believe there were so many different kinds of refrigerators. I could see from the variety that they weren’t just big, cold boxes where you shove leftovers - the possibilities were endless. We had to have the one with every possible feature, and at the very minimum, an exterior water dispenser *with crushed ice!*

I calmed down and caught up with my parents, who were being shown around by a salesman. After a minute of close inspection my mom told the man: “I don’t want one with all that gingerbread. Just something simple.” Wait, what? Are you kidding me? I was just imagining whether there were any fridges that came with a built-in crockpot or  6-speed blender. My mom explained to me: “Gingerbread just means all that stuff that you don’t really need.” I was fascinated.

Now jump ahead many, many years, and I’m a UX designer. A word that constantly swirls around my brain while I’m working on a project is “gingerbread”. The thing about parents is that they’re so influential, and accordingly, I took on my mom’s negative attitude towards ornamentation and superfluous functionality. Trace our family tree back a generation or two and you find men deep in the coal mines of southern Wales - and suddenly this deeply-rooted pragmatic attitude becomes much more understandable.

Since that trip to Sears, I have been fascinated, even obsessed, by gingerbread and what it represents in both aesthetics and function. When I was a teenager, I convinced my parents to visit Newport, Rhode Island to tour the summer homes of the Vanderbilts, Rockefellers, and other industrialists who made the Gilded Age shine so garishly bright. If you’re unfamiliar, these New York-based families formed an enclave of mansions on the coast of Rhode Island and modeled them on Versailles, sprawling Italian villas, and other buildings that would cost hundreds of millions to replicate today. As their summer homes, they spent a few weeks in these homes a year. It is the greatest excess and conspicuous consumption that I have ever walked through. Today, as a UX designer, I think these homes were marvels in terms of user experience, as the excessiveness was so well executed, and the designer/architect (in most cases from the firm of McKim, Mead and White) nailed the most essential function of the buildings: to display unparalleled excess and therefore the owners’ ability to have more than one needs.

In my own design work I always see an invisible line in front of me. If an idea or iteration falls on the bad side of the line, it in some way has (or is) too much. (Alert! There’s gingerbread in our midst!) On the other side of the line, the design or idea has just what it needs. I always strive for simplicity because I think users are like my mom looking at those refrigerators: They just want something simple. A lot of gingerbread just gets in the way if it has no use and doesn’t help users meet their goals. Being able to press a button on the front of your fridge and have crushed ice poured into your glass surely seemed like a marvel of design at the time, but the feature does not afford a great user experience and has begun to fade away. 

I’m always a bit surprised when I visit a new home and the host pours me a glass a water from a dispenser on their fridge - because it never happens. Most models with those features have long since had their dispensers rendered useless: Having to clean and maintain a water filtration system and ice maker is a burdensome task. It’s no coincidence that the heyday of these dispensers came before the emergence of user experience as we know it. But thankfully, user experience has ushered in the era of freezer-on-bottom refrigerators, which are simple, devoid of gingerbread, and afford the true needs of the user. A Rockefeller would scoff at a fridge that can’t crush ice, but most people would want a design that affords convenience in their daily lives as opposed to something that impresses the neighbors. My mom really wants one. And it goes without saying, my mom really wants one.
